---
layout: post
title: Getting started with Ansible
---

## What is Ansible and why should I use it?

Ansible is a systems automation tool: It let's you configure and deploy your infrastructure from a simple list of tasks applied to roles. It's a powerful piece of software, as it's not only the *core* but also a myriad of modules created both from Ansible and the open-source community.

Inside [Shootr](http://shootr.com) we use Ansible to automate AMI image creation for our backend and all its services. Here we provide a simple example to illustrate the basic usage of Ansible.

## A simple file structure

Ansible is very opinionated with regards to the folder structure, so every Ansible project contains the same structure. In this example we're focusing on the basic usage so we won't be using a bunch of its features like handlers or template files. You can also find this example in our [Github repository](https://github.com/ShootrNetwork/blog-examples/tree/master/backend/ansible).

```
- roles
  - print_ping
    - vars
      - main.yml
    - tasks
      - main.yml
    - templates
    - files
- hosts
- print-ping-playbook.yml 
```

There are two main components in Ansible: Playbooks and roles. A role defines an specific set of tasks which will be applied to hosts. A playbook assigns roles to hosts, so that allows to create reusable pieces. A host file is also necessary: It groups hosts with the same intended functionality. 

## Defining a task

<script src="https://gist-it.appspot.com/github/ShootrNetwork/blog-examples/blob/master/backend/ansible/roles/print_ping/tasks/main.yml"></script>

This sample task prints the results of the ping command to a given host or IP. The process is the following: Ansible executes the shell command and saves the output to a variable. Then, using the _debug_ module of Ansible, it prints the result of the command.

## Creating a playbook

<script src="https://gist-it.appspot.com/github/ShootrNetwork/blog-examples/blob/master/backend/ansible/print-ping-playbook.yml"></script>

This playbook assigns the role of _print_ping_ to the group of hosts, so every host in the _local_ group will execute the tasks associated with the _print_ping_ role.

## Execute the playbook

To run this playbook we need to execute in console the next command: 

```ansible-playbook -i hosts --extra-vars "ip=8.8.8.8" print-ping-playbook.yml```   

The param *ip* indicates the ping destination. We declare this param in the vars/main.yml file like this:
<script src="https://gist-it.appspot.com/github/ShootrNetwork/blog-examples/blob/master/backend/ansible/roles/print_ping/vars/main.yml"></script>


Antonio, Francesc
  